## Narrative: 2018-06-26_pra1

**Objective**: obtain data on an `Intel Atom 330` based system with only one CPU enabled. 
To be compared with [2018-06-26_pra2](2018-06-26_pra2.md).

| Attribute | Value |
| --------- | ----- |
| Host   | [pra1](hostinfo_pra1.md) |
| System | Herc tk4- |
| s370_perf | [V0.9.7  rev  1003  2018-03-30](https://github.com/wfjm/s370-perf/blob/2685ff0/codes/s370_perf.asm) |
| Creation Date | 2018-06-26 |
| Send by | Phil Roberts |
| CPU clock | 1600 MHz |
| [ASM step](README_narr.md#user-content-asm) | `CPU:  17.66s   1.80%; CPU/ela:  91.93%` |
| [GO step](README_narr.md#user-content-go)   | `CPU: 273.03s   0.16%; CPU/ela:  99.61%` |
| Data | [2018-06-26_pra1.dat](../data/2018-06-26_pra1.dat) |
| Summaries | [pra1 vs pra2](sum_2018-06-26_pra2_and_pra1.dat) - _absolute instruction time (sorted by ratio)_ |
| [lmark](README_narr.md#user-content-lmark) | 19.35 MIPS |

### <a id="find">Findings</a>
- **General**
  - the test reproducibility is very good, the median of the 50% width is 0.92%.
- **Instruction timing relative to pra2 system**
  - the [pra1](hostinfo_pra1.md) system is a **factor 1.066 slower**
    than the [pra2](hostinfo_pra2.md) system,
    based on the [lmark](README_narr.md#user-content-lmark) MIPS ratio of
    19.35 to 20.63.
  - the pra1/pra2 instruction time ratio has a very small spread, see
    [pra1 vs pra2](#user-content-find-vs-pra2)
    timing comparison.

#### <a id="find-vs-pra2">pra1 vs pra2 timing comparison</a>

The [pra1](hostinfo_pra1.md) and the [pra2](hostinfo_pra2.md) system use
both an Intel Atom 330 CPU. In `pra1` only a single core is enabled, while
`pra2` uses the capacity of the CPU. Since the vintage 2008 Atom 330 has
no variable CPU clock both systems run definitively with the base clock
of 1.6 GHz.

The [pra1 vs pra2](sum_2018-06-26_pra2_and_pra1.dat) instruction timing
listing shows the absolute instruction times for pra2 and pra1 as well as
the pra1/pra2 ratio, sorted by ascending pra1/pra2 ratio.

The pra1/pra2 instruction time ratio has a very small spread.
The most likely explanation is that all Hercules threads compete now for
only one host system core. As result, the Hercules service threads will
divert host CPU time from the Hercules thread which emulates the s/370 CPU,
which must lead to a reduced effective CPU speed seen at the MVS level.
This is also nicely seen in the increased CPU time for the ASM step
```
  pra1:  CPU:  17.66s   1.80%;   CPU/ela:  91.93%
  pra2:  CPU:  15.68s   0.67%;   CPU/ela:  92.24%
```

An alternative explanation would be a lower memory access performance,
but in this case memory intensive instructions like `MVCL` should see
a significant performance hit compared to simple RR instructions, which
is not observed.

Only the `STCK` timing differs significantly. Both systems use the same OS
and the same kernel. A possible explanation could be that the access to
the CPU timers has less overhead in a single core system.
